Samuel Montoya, self-employed mechanic, Bryan,
Texas, approximately 61 years old, interviewed
May 3, 1975, by Adela Lopez and Jim Crisp.
He lost his father, and then his mother and his
brothers
came into Floresville. And from Floresville,
they had a hard time. So they heard about having,
down in Southeast Texas, having a big saw mill
there. So they hit the saw mills. When they hit the
saw mills, well then, they found a way out. And my
father was lucky. He was a blacksmith by trade. And
he was a, what do you call this? Flatheads. Do you
know what a flathead is? I don't know what a
flathead is. It's one of these big worms, white
worms that grow in trees. They feed in the trees.
They call them flatheads. He saw logs. They call
them flatheads. Log sawyers.
He saw logs for many years. He built a sawmill in
Brandcroft, Texas. That's about 10 miles, maybe
15 miles from Orange, Texas, in Orange County. And
then from there, he moved to Texla back in 1923. I
remember from there, I owned real good then,
because in 1923, I was chasing rabbits,
squirrels, all that. And I was big enough to do that
and get lost. Spend a night in the woods and find my
way back next day by the sun. And well, I finally
grew up, went to school. I went to school at the age
of nine. And I started naturally with the little
ones. And I was a giant for the little ones. But I
learned to read and write. And I finished my years
in school in sixth grade. Well, I did finish sixth
grade, though. I graduated from sixth grade. Or
which awaited one.
And then from there, it was back in 1932,
we lived in Deweyville. And that place still
stands. It's a pretty little town. It's getting to
be a good little business there. I have a few
friends there yet that we went to school together.
And 32, we hit Brian. Well, my uncle was a mechanic
here for the Missouri Pacific. And he kept up to
that steam engine there. And he wrote to me in that
year, asking me to come to Brian and visit him. So by
that time, sawmill had played out. So we didn't
have a job. My daddy didn't have a job. And we was
looking for a way out. When this car comes in, I had
me a Model T that I bought back in 28. And that's
where I learned my automobile trade. When I was
going to school, there was a man by the name of,
well, Shannon. And he was an engineer there for the
sawmill that he built. these
engines, these locomotives. And he started
building one. And I asked him, Shannon, what are
you going to do here? He says, I'm going to build me a
locomotive. Wow, I'd like to see that. He says,
well, we're going to build it from the rail up. And
you can see it every day. You may come by and see what
progress we have. So there were two men working.
But he was the head engineer. I got to see that
engine, get out of that shop, and I got to maneuver
the thing. I was big enough. The only thing was that
I wasn't strong enough to pull that big lever. That
was pretty heavy to do. But when I did, I got pretty
smart and found ways to do it with a club. And I moved
that engine. I stopped it. Then I got a little
bigger. That other little engine that was smaller
than that, that was pretty easy to move. It was half
worn out. That really was easy. But I managed to
learn how to move a locomotive real good and all
that. And then that was back in 28, 29. Then we moved
from Texas to Deauville. That's when we came to
Bryan. When I came to Bryan, my uncle was taking
care of this big locomotive. It was 900 horses in
it. Of course, to compare a mobile nowadays, that
engine wasn't very big. But it still was a big
thing. But my cousin said, Sam, I'm going to show
you how to operate this engine. I said, well, I
learned a few days ago that a man's going to put
things together. You do it first. And then you read
the instructions before you made a mistake. He
said, you're doing it backwards. I said, that's
what I want to tell you. Let me see if I do it
backwards here. He said, no, no, no, because this
thing might get away from you. I said, oh, what?
What so? The engineer here with me can always stop
it. Oh, he felt big then. I said, well, now, first
thing, we pull this lever here back to make it back
up. And we pull the throttle a little at a time so it
won't spin. And you stop it, you pull this lever
here, and it stopped it. Hydraulics. Oh, you don't
know that? Well, I'm an old man, you know. I was
about 18, 17, 18 then. I said, well, I'll show you
that. I got around.
I said, well, I do know this. By that, in a way, I know
more than this. being a Chevrolet or Ford, I don't
care where he breaks down or where he stops, I'll
get that thing going right there. Now I know that.
He said, well, you learned that. Well, I tell you,
old days.
Well, he was very surprised, because I did. Drive
my car there and And every time we have a little
problem with it, I fix it. What's going on? Well,
from then on, he didn't have a thing to say to me. I
said, another thing, I would like to make a boat
since we have the river here pretty close. I can
make a boat out of some light lumber and let's go
fishing. I like fishing. Oh, no. I can't do it. Oh,
well. So by that time, uh, We had been here about,
oh, I'd say 18 days, and the cotton field opened up
for shopping cotton. I never did know what a cotton
field was, so I took my hoe, and we went with a bunch
to Dr.
Richardson's farm. We went there to that farm, and
We started chopping cotton for the whole day, from
sunup to sundown.
We chopped cotton for that season. And then when
the cotton harvest came in, we went cotton
picking. But I didn't have cotton picking hands.
It so happened that we went to the chancellor's
place to pick cotton. I tried my best to, and cotton
was just right. I mean, right size and plenty of it
and all that. But my cotton picking hands weren't
there. Forget it. Told my dad, I was making, I was
pulling 50 pounds of cotton a day from sunup to
sundown. I couldn't see anymore. I said, this is
going to kill me and store me to death. I better
move. I said, I think I'm going to find a job and go
write somewhere in Bryant. So I left. I said, I'll
be back for you all Saturday morning. So I came to
Brian. And just lucky that day, that Tuesday
morning, I went down the street. Saw this wrecking
yard right there by 23rd and Brian. I said, there's
a wrecking yard. I'm going to see if I can find it. I
went in there, inquired about the man's name. I
said, Mr. Brogdon? Yes, sir. I'm looking for a job.
Oh, a lot of people are looking for a job now. Well,
there's a lot of cotton back in the field. What are
you looking for? Well, what are you? I said, I just
come from there. I don't have cotton picking
hands. He said, well, what can you do? I said, I can
repair automobiles. Oh, you look mighty young to
know anything about that. I said, well, just try me
out. He said, well, I'll tell you what I'll do. I'll
give you $3 a week. I said, that's good enough. That
bit's cotton fake. And I went to work for him for $3 a
week. But I enjoyed myself in that sense. Really,
the thing was that I didn't care about how much
money I made. The thing was that experiencing
other automobiles, like the Moon, like the
Whippet, like the Star, you name them, they were
there. I was working on them and fixing tires. He
had a sign there. He said, you bust them, we fix
them. And we fixed batteries. I learned how to
rebuild a battery. In fact, I built one that I put
in. But then he had a good Chevrolet there that I
traded my Ford for and gave him $25 a boot. And that
Chevrolet didn't have a battery. I said, it was
broken. I'm going to make me a battery and put it in
my car. He said, yeah, go on, do it. So I built me a
battery. And I drove that car five years. And when I
sold the car, the battery wasn't in that car yet. I
said, I must have been a good battery
manufacturer. And I was surprised at that
battery. So I had good luck with it. And then in 33, I
joined the CC camp. I thought I knew enough in
automobiles to go to the CC camp. get some other
kind of experience, so I was took, I tell you. Well,
then we got in with this bunch of boys here in Bryan.
We went to, they took us to Arizona, Alpine. And
there we were, well, I went to a lot of places there
after, like, for instance, Saturday and Sunday
that we didn't work. Flagstaff and
Holbrook and Other little places and rivers.
Imagine all that fish in those rivers and I can't
go. And those days I'd go, that's a lot of fish
there. Why do that? You care too much about
fishing. It's better because I want to move
around. I thought if I sit down and fish, I'd lose
time. I'd be traveling while I had the
opportunity. So I kept going, kept going. Well, in
July of 33, I came back to Bryant. I didn't like
Bryant. But I didn't have a choice. I had to go to
work in A&M College at Mass Hall to make a living. I
done had all the traveling. I was tired of
traveling. And I almost held out for a while and
rest. And, well, what else I might think of? So I
worked there at the mess hall one session, which it
was. Well, I don't know if it was one session or
what, but I went in there right after I got back in
July. And I worked there till January the next
year. That was 34. In 34, I went to Houston. I
couldn't find a job in Houston, so I come back. I
spent about a month there in Houston, come back.
Couldn't make it. Then I went to work back again
there. And I worked that
spring there. And it was in September I went back to
Houston. That was in 34. Got me a job at the Wright
Hotel serving tables there. I took it up. Wasn't
making very much, but making my expenses and
living. having a lot of fun. And I didn't care about
nothing else but having a lot of fun. And I did enjoy
my work. I don't know why. Everywhere that I went to
work that they treated me halfway right, I enjoyed
my work. Where I wasn't treated too good, I'd left
it. Never was afraid to leave a job. I knew I had
another one somewhere else. And I'm still that
way. Of course, here, I've been here 30 years, and I
can't leave it. I have left it. I left it, I think,
was four times to go help out somewhere, whatever
they call me. I'd go there and say, let's call that a
vacation. I had a two-month, no, no, one-month
vacation in Toledo, Ohio, back in 1948. Closed up
here and went to Toledo to work. Fifteen days
later, I came to my family. We went out there. We
couldn't live. Now let's go back home. We come back
home, open up my doors, and going back to work. You
just couldn't leave Brian, could you? No, I tried
my best. I have my shoes tied here so tight that I
can't leave. Well, I decided I'll stay home. But
back in 1955, I was called from... Teddy Decker in
Houston to go keep up his equipment. He had a nice
shop and all that. He gave me a good break. Well, I
went to work for him. I worked for him nine months. I
couldn't make, I don't know why, making, I was
making as much as I was, maybe a little more than I
was making here, and I couldn't make ends meet.
See, there's something wrong here somewhere
because I know it's, It's about $35 more than I make
at the shop. And yet, I get my gas and my oil out of the
company to go to Brian and back, and yet I can't make
it. And I wasn't paying board and room because I was
living with a couple that were from Brian, and they
wouldn't charge me a dime to live with them. I tried
to pay them. I said, no, as long as you're here, you
So you get settled. I said, heck, it might be two,
three years before I get settled. He said, you got a
home here? So I said, goodness, and yet I can't make
Ian Smith. So I tell the old man, quit? Oh, you can't
quit now. Yes, I can. He said, well, I tell you, I'm
going to let you go as soon as you find me a man like
you. I said, oh, man, I'm going to find you one
better than I. He said, well, just one like you, not
any better. Well, turning in the papers,
advertised for a man that would take care of
equipment, a maintenance man, experienced. One
of the first day I had about 50 there to interview. I
said, oh, I can't interview all of those. I told the
old man, I said, come down here. He said, that's
your job. I said, you're going to find the man. The
thing was that he wanted to tie me I was already tied
down where I couldn't get away from there, and he
was going to keep me there. Said, Mr. Manley, I have
so much work to do that I can't interview you. He
said, well, you let the work go, you interview the
people. You call them, now you get into them. Well,
I tried to call the youngest ones, someone that
looked to me like I had common sense. Well, I found
several of them. I told the restaurant, well, I'll
call you. They gave me all the address, all the
phone numbers, and a book full of address, and
telephone number, and names, and all kinds. I'll
call you as soon as the old man decides. I can't hire
you, but I will recommend the man that I think is
good for the job. And the old man, oh, I say he's
around 70. He want to beat me up because I wouldn't
give him the job. Look, I need a young man. You're a
retired man. He said, no, I'm not. I said, well,
that's your hard luck. And
he almost beat me up. But I said, no, come on. Come
on. Go on. You know you can't quit me. If you could,
I'd let you. But I've got some work to do. I can't
lose that kind of a time. But he really was mad. So
then after three weeks of fighting, fighting the
boss man, I told one young man, now you're going to
stay here and you just take over. I'm going home.
And I did. And I don't know, I believe it was six
months later, Mr. Mandler came to the shop here.
And he, him and Mr. Lindsay, that neighbor there,
you put them together, you think, You wouldn't
know who was Mr. Manley. And I was working under a
car. I said, how are you doing? I thought I
recognized you. Oh, I'm doing all right.
Well, when you get through there or you want to take
a little break, let's go get some coffee.
All right. So I get out and Oh, how you doing? Oh,
just fine, let's see. But I thought it was Mr.
Lindsey. Never did think of Mr. Manley anymore, so
we talked and said a lot of things. After a while he
said, you know, you don't know who I am.
I said, I see you every day. He said, oh, now I know
you don't know who I am. Yes, I do. You're Mr.
Lindsey, aren't you? No. But you know that mostly
every Monday we came in your house there and drank
some coffee, chatted, you know. Oh, boy. Well, who
are you thinking? I'm sorry. Oh, never be. Never be
sorry. Let's go get some coffee. Came in here. Sit
there like we did every Monday. I was off on Monday.
And he'd come here to drink coffee with me and spend
an hour or two with me. And then he'd go back. Well,
we'd sit there and
say, I don't want you to go to work, but I want you to
do one thing. The 1st of October, I want you to come
over to my office and spend an hour or two with me. I
have something for you there. I'm retiring. I'm
leaving that day, and I want you to come there. But
one day, I was working in the shop there, and I had so
much to do. I had six trucks to put up with. Besides
that, I had some machinery in the plant that I had to
work over. It looked like that week I was a little
behind. He called me. He said, come over to the
office. I need you right now. So I didn't think of
pulling my dirty clothes off. I just washed my
hands, kept my grace of heart. Went up to his
office. There's all these big wheels there. I went
to take my hand. Oh, I felt like I wanted to go in the
floor. This was here in Brad? No, no, that was in
Houston, yes. And it says, now, this is a big Brad
from Chicago. Now, I call you because I want them to
know you. They already know it by your name and what
you do and all that. But I said, when you tell me
this, dirty or clean or whatever, you're the same
man. You're not going to change any. You're right
about that. Yeah, we've got a chair, a tie, and
whatnot. There's nobody. We're just partners in
this same job. And you know, I appreciated all of
that, because you may not have an education. Oh,
boy, those big engineers and all that. It made me
feel mighty small. But after they say, no, no,
we're all the same. We're in the same business.
We've got your department. We have ours. Each one
of us has. We have to do one job to get this thing
going. That's right. So then I said, You'll have to
pardon me because I have so much to do and I got to get
it done. I said, no, we're going to eat. Oh, no. I
said, yes. I said, we're going to eat. I said, wait a
minute. Give me about five minutes. Let me go pull
this. He said, okay, okay. I went down there and
pulled my cover all up, white stuff. Then we went to
eat. They took me to, I don't know what place it was.
Beautiful place. I mean, I I couldn't hardly sit on
the chairs. I felt so small. But they fed me. And
they'd talk all day. And I kept saying, I got some
tomorrow. I don't know what they had. I never did
learn why they called me. They want to talk to me and
all that. But later on, when Mr. Manley came here
and said that he wanted me to go to and be in his
office on the 31st of October, I didn't go. And then
two or three weeks later, a ball blittered in my
head. I said, golly, I bet you I missed the biggest
opportunity of my life there. Well, that wasn't
the first one, anyway. I lost many. They never
treated you like that around here, though. I
invented apparatus back in 1941, 42. And I
was expecting to find an automobile, waiting for
an automobile of that model that I invented an
apparatus for to hit the junkyard so I could buy it
to make it work. And I patented the thing. Well, I
waited and waited three years. And one day, there
was a thing. I looked at it. Uh-oh. Something going
wrong now. Came to the garage and took my piece. I
said, Davis, this here, see what I...
How do you copy that? I said, no. I made this three
years ago to go on this 40 miles here already. And
here you have one already. What are you telling me?
It just came out. This is a new patent. I said, well,
three years ago I made this thing. But I didn't
patent it because I wasn't sure if it was going to
work or not. But look. They said, well, you just
lost about $10,000 plus commission. And I said,
well, that's part of my living. That's all right. I
don't want to get to race anyway. Live. The car
don't kill me. I'm going to live until I die. That's
the beginning of it.
Oh, we still have how much? No telling. Well, back
in the war years, I was called to Bryan to come and
that Bryan,
what was the fourth place name then? Bryan Motor
Company. By Mr. Elvin Depot. by the way i was
working in huntsville at that time at the cheryl
lake place and i was called down here fourth place i
came here i said well uh miss depot the only way i
could move is that see i don't want to go in there or
in the service because i know i'm gonna be put in the
navy and i don't like to be in there in the boat
because i'm gonna go in there bottom of the boat now
i don't mind going being on top but being on the
bottom and i know where i'm going because i'm a
mechanic in the first place and that's where i'm
gonna go now i don't want to be there they say oh
don't you worry about that if you work with us we'll
we'll see that you don't go good move and i think
that's when i i said well since i'm not going in the
service i'm gonna build my house i built this house
by myself. It's made out of concrete blocks that
are 14 inches long, 12 inches high, and 12 inches
wide. Each block weighs around 70 pounds. Sturdy
place. Yes. I made 1,500 blocks. My foundation is
seven feet deep down to hard. There's a rock seven
feet deep here that the railroad pick, it'll
bounce. It won't go through. That's where this
house is sitting on, on that kind of a rock. What
year did you build your house? I built it in 46.
And built from... Later on, I'll put that top
corner, that additional thing here. Two or three
years ago, I had that back built. I didn't have time
to build it. I did all the inside in that one down
there. I just made the whole thing. But I wired
this. Pretty good electrician. They stand up that
many years, and mine must be pretty good. Sewer
lines, I never put in my own sewer lines. And I never
had one plug yet for many years. My house, that
train, that steam engine, when we had the steam
engines here and they're coming through there,
every time it pumped, this thing would shake. Now
that's how hard, how deep they found it on the
railroad. But I could feel the engine. And all the
windows were made out of wood and, you know, wood
frame. And later on, I put this long windows in. But
they would shake. And this house never break. They
don't have a broken spot where I had to patch and I
like that. I think I built, I wasn't too good of a
doubler then. I'm a better, a little better now,
but. I think I was about 30 years old then. No, I was
younger. Well, I'd say around 30 anyway. I said, I
must have a lot of sins. I know men right now that are
45 and they don't have sins at all yet. I don't know
where I got them from, but I give myself a lot of
polish. But my son, my son Sammy, when I said,
Sammy, you're going to graduate from high school.
I want you to go to college. Not that I don't think
you're smart, no. But on top of that, I want you to be
smarter yet. So he went to college. And he says the
first year he was in college, he learned how smart I
was. I said, well, good thing I didn't have school.
Otherwise, I don't know what I'd be. Would have
ruined you probably. Wow, I've been in
penitentiary, yeah, behind bars. I've been, oh,
probably been...